L01: Students will be able to:
1.	Explain how locations are described on Earth using geographic regions, latitude/longitude, and local directions.
2.	Summarize what constellations are and describe how they are used to identify patterns of stars and to divide the sky into “geographic” regions.
3.	Explain how the celestial sphere is used to describe the positions of stars in the sky.
4.	Describe the three different ways we locate objects in the sky - constellations, altitude/azimuth, and right ascension/declination.    

L02:  Students will be able to:
1.	Relate how changing the latitude of an observer affects the altitude and azimuth of stars in the sky.   
2.	Explain how an observer’s location on Earth where the observer sees the star Polaris.
3.	Describe how the Earth rotates.
4.	Predict how the Sun and stars as the rise and set as seen from Murfreesboro.
5.	Summarize the connection between time and longitude.
6.	Explain how the Earth’s rotation affects the view of the stars around Polaris.

L03: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe how stars move around Polaris as seen from different latitudes.
2.	Predict the motion of the Sun and the stars as they rise and set as seen from different latitudes.
3.	Describe the Celestial sphere, the North Celestial Pole, and the Celestial Equator.
4.	Interpret the shapes of star trails to determine the observer’s location on Earth and the direction they are facing.
5.	Distinguish between annual motion and daily motion, and describe how they differ from each other.
6.	Related the tilt of the Earth’s axis (relative to its orbit) to seasonal changes in the Sun’s motion and the weather.

L04: Students will be able to:
1.	Distinguish between sidereal time and solar time. 
2.	Explain the changes in the observed position of the Sun caused by annual motion.
3.	Identify that precession of the equinoxes causes shifts in the seasons over the centuries.
4.	Describe what causes the phases of the moon.
5.	Illustrate the sequence of moon phases and how orbital positions are related to each phase.
6.	Explain why eclipses don’t occur every month and why solar eclipses are less commonly observed than lunar eclipses.

L05: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the apparent motion of the planets and discuss why this motion appears to be so much more complex than other celestial objects.
2.	Discuss why the Ancient Greeks used epicycles to describe planetary motion.
3.	Describe the basic features of the heliocentric model by Copernicus and distinguish it from the model created by Kepler and Newton.
4.	Discuss the key observations by Galileo and Brahe and explain their significance.
 
L07: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe how the atmosphere affects the temperature and surface features on Earth, and how changes in the atmosphere affect the climate.
2.	Explain the internal structure of the Earth and plate tectonics have formed the continents and mountains on Earth.
3.	Describe how the Earth’s magnetic field is created.
4.	Contrast how and why the surface features on the moon, its atmosphere and its magnetic field are different than those on the Earth.
5.	Explain how tides are caused by differences in the gravitational force that is felt across a body.

L08: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the geological forces that drive the formation of surface features on the terrestrial planets and how different conditions have lead to different surface features on the planets.
2.	Explain how the rotation rates of planets and the size of the core affect the formation of magnetic fields.
3.	Explain how temperature, surface gravity, atomic weight of gases, and magnetic fields affect atmospheric composition and density.
4.	Be able to describe the geologies, rotations, surface temperatures, atmospheres, magnetic fields, and unusual features of each of the terrestrial planets.

L09: Students will be able to:
1.	Analyze how molecular weight, surface gravity and planetary temperature determine the composition of a planet’s atmosphere.
2.	Summarize the bulk properties of the Jovian planets, including their rotation rates, masses, magnetic fields, compositions, sizes, rings, and colors.
3.	Explain the causes for the similarities and differences between the Jovian planets.
4.	Explain the similarities and differences between Jovian and Terrestrial planets.

L10: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe how the Uranus, Neptune and Pluto were discovered.
2.	Discuss the characteristics and unique features of the larger moons in the solar system, including the Galilean moons of Jupiter, Titan, Enceladus, Triton, and Mimas.
3.	Explain how planetary rings are formed and describe the characteristics of the rings around the Jovian planets. 

L11: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the composition, orbits, and characteristics of the Kuiper belt objects and how they were discovered.
2.	Differentiate between the asteroid belt and the Kuiper belt and list the characteristics of the bodies in these parts of our solar system.
3.	Explain what meteors are, and discuss the threat of meteor impacts on Earth.
4.	Discuss where comets come from, describe their compositions, and explain why they are rarely seen but sometimes visible to the naked eye. 
5.	List the basic steps and physical processes that caused the formation of the solar system.
 
L13: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe why the Sun has a visible surface when it is made out of gas.
2.	Explain what a self-regulating system is, and how this is related to hydrostatic equilibrium.
3.	List the layers of the Sun’s atmosphere and interior.
4.	Discuss how the Sun’s magnetic field is related to Sunspots.
5.	Describe the Sunspot cycle 
6.	List and contrast the types of Solar Storms and their impact on the Earth.

L14: Students will be able to
1.	Distinguish between luminosity and brightness.
2.	Describe how size, surface temperature, surface area and luminosity are related to each other.
3.	Analyze how a star’s surface temperature, size, and distance influence its luminosity and apparent brightness.
4.	Interpret how the color of star is related to its surface temperature. 

L15: Students will be able to:
1.	Understand the concept of parallax and how it is related to distance.
2.	List and describe the relationships between the various regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
3.	Describe the differences in the colors of the rainbow and how they are related to white light.
4.	Make use of Kirchhoff’s laws to predict they type of spectra we would observe under different conditions.
5.	Relate associate spectral types, stellar colors and stellar surface temperature.

L16: Students will be able to:
1.	Identify the axis and major regions of interest in the HR diagram.
2.	Compare the characteristics of stars on the HR diagram, including their luminosity, surface temperature, and size.
3.	Infer the masses of stars on the main sequence from their spectral types, and understand that this relationship only applies to stars on the main sequence.

L17: Students will be able to:
1.	Relate the masses of stars to their lifetimes on the main sequence and be able to describe the underlying reasons of why mass affects the lifetime of stars.
2.	Explain the reasons why low mass stars are so much more common that high mass stars.
3.	Describe how energy is produced in the Sun.
4.	Explain how energy produced in the Sun’s core reaches the Sun’s surface through convection and radiation.
5.	Describe how helioseismology and solar neutrino measurements each provide a measurement of the conditions in the Sun’s interior.
6.	Understand the basis for apparent and absolute magnitudes.

L19: Students will be able to:
1.	Distinguish between emission, reflection, and dark nebula.
2.	Understand how the mass of stars is related to their luminosity and lifetime on the main sequence.
3.	Name and describe the stages a gas cloud goes through as it transforms into a a cluster of main sequence stars.
4.	Describe the power source and characteristics of protostars.

L20: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the physical and observational differences between open and globular clusters.
2.	Describe how HR diagrams of clusters change as the cluster ages.
3.	How why stars leave the main sequence and how their internal structure changes as they evolve.
4.	Name and describe each of the major stages a star like the sun goes through after leaving the main sequence until it becomes a white dwarf.
5.	Draw diagrams of the internal structure of each of the post-main sequence stages that associate each stage with the internal energy sources.

L21: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the differences between Nova, Supernova, and the formation of Planetary Nebula.
2.	Explain conditions that cause Nova, Supernova Type I, Supernova Type II, and Hyper-nova.  
3.	Describe the how we find supernova in other galaxies as well as supernova remnants in our own galaxy.
4.	List and describe some of the more famous supernova remnants from our own galaxy.
5.	Understand how the cycle of stellar evolution has changed the composition of our galaxy.

L22: Students will be able to:
1.	Explain the differences between Nova, type I Supernova, and type II Supernova, including the conditions that lead to these explosions.
2.	Describe the physical characteristics and the formation paths of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.
3.	Describe how pulsars work and how they are formed.
4.	Explain how pulsars are formed and why they are not created in all Supernova.

L23: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the masses of the main sequence stars that eventually become white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.
2.	Discuss how gamma-ray bursts and Hypernova are associated with the formation of black holes.
3.	Analyze how time is affected for observers in gravitational fields.
4.	Connect the theories of special and general relativity to technology used in their everyday lives.
5.	Explain the observational evidence for black holes.

L25: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the size, shape and characteristics of the Milky Way Galaxy and why it looks so differently when it is viewed from Earth.
2.	Summarize how (and why) RR Lyra and Cepheid variables can be used to determine interstellar distances and map our galaxy.
3.	Contrast how the ages and orbits of halo, disk and bulge stars differ, and relate how this helps us understand how the galaxy formed.
4.	Describe how the structures in the bulge, disk and halo are associated with the formation of the Milky Way.
5.	Illustrate how density waves create spiral arms.

L26: Students will be able to:
1.	Identify the evidence we have for their being a supermassive black hole in the center of our galaxy.
2.	Describe the relative sizes of protons, the solar system, the galaxy, and clusters of galaxies.
3.	Identify and describe the differences between spiral, barred spirals, elliptical and irregular galaxies.
4.	Understand the role the volunteers can play in helping scientists classify galaxies and solve scientific problems.

L27: Students will be able to:
1.	Discuss the distribution of galaxies in space, including the separation distances between galaxies and clusters of galaxies.
2.	Explain how Doppler shift can be used determine the internal rotation, local orbits and recessional velocity of galaxies.
3.	Describe what a rotation curve is and explain how it is used to determine the mass of a galaxy.
4.	Describe Hubble’s law.

L28: Students will be able to:
1.	Analyze how changing the orbital distance and mass will affect the strength of gravity and speed of an orbiting body.
2.	Explain why rotation curves lead us to conclude that galaxies contain a great deal of invisible mass in their outer halos.
3.	Explain how orbits within galaxy clusters, observations of hot gas in galaxies, and gravitational lensing measurements all lead use to the conclusion that most of the mass of a galaxy is made of dark matter.
4.	Describe why we conclude that dark matter is not made of stars, gas, or dust and why it is probably not made of ordinary atoms.

L29: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the characteristics of clusters of galaxies.
2.	Discuss the differences between normal and active galaxies, and describe the power source of active galaxies.
3.	Explain what happens when galaxies collide and merge and discuss how common this is. 
4.	Explain how galaxies have merged and evolved over the history of the universe.

L31: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the structures we see on the largest scales in the universe and the scales they encompass.
2.	Define the terms Isotropic and Homogeneous and how these terms apply to the universe.
3.	Explain how Olber’s paradox leads us to conclude that the universe is not infinitely old, infinitely large, and unchanging.
4.	Apply Hubble’s law to determine the distances or redshifts of galaxies.
5.	Apply Hubble’s law to determine the distance or red shift velocity for a distant galaxy. 
6.	Explain why we think the universe had a beginning based on Hubble’s law.
7.	Explain how we determine the Age of the Universe using the Hubble constant.

L32: Students will be able to:
1.	Expanding the difference between space expanding and galaxies moving away from each other. 
2.	Discuss the history and scientific basis of the big bang theory.
3.	Apply the idea of critical density to determine if the universe is dynamically open, closed, or flat.
4.	Open, Closed, Flat Dynamics.
5.	Describe what determines the fate of the universe.
6.	Explain how the universe can be infinitely large but still have a finite age.

L33: Students will be able to:
1.	Explain how look back time allows us to look at young galaxies and the universe when it was younger.
2.	Discuss the horizon of the universe and how it limits what we can see.
3.	Explain why we believe the universe was hotter in the past.
4.	Describe the origin and discovery of the 3k background radiation.

L34: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe how the accuracy of measurements of cosmological parameters including Hubble’s constant have changed over the last decades.
2.	Explain how tiny temperature differences seen in the COBE/WMAP data are tied to the formation of galaxies and large-scale structure.
3.	Discuss the difference between cosmic geometry and cosmic dynamics.
4.	Explain how dark energy was discovered, how it is measured, and the role it plays in cosmic evolution 
5.	Describe the composition of the universe

L35: Students will be able to:
1.	Explain the effect Dark Energy has on Hubble’s law and how it was discovered.
2.	Describe Epoch of Nucleosynthesis and how we experimentally test our understanding of this period.
3.	Discuss the Epoch of Inflation including recent experimental results and their scientific significance.

L37: Students will be able to:
1.	List the characteristics of life.
2.	Describe the role the big bang and stellar evolution had in creating the elements.
3.	Describe the formation of the planets in the solar system.
4.	Discuss the processes that form complex chemical molecules and where they are found.
5.	Describe the basic biochemistry for life on Earth and how it is similar to molecules found elsewhere.
6.	Explain the basic function of DNA, proteins, and enzymes in living organisms.
7.	Describe the variety of conditions where life has been found on Earth.

L38: Students will be able to:
1.	Place the cosmic events in order from the Big Bang to the current era.
2.	Distinguish between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic cells and when they arose on Earth.
3.	List the major stages and approximate timeline for the evolution of life on Earth.
4.	Describe the timeline for life evolving on Earth.
5.	Distinguish between intelligence, civilization, and technology.

L39: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the different kinds of early speculation about life in the Universe.
2.	Discuss the search for life on Mars from Lowell to the Mariner missions.
3.	Explain the results of the Viking Mission, ALH84001, and the new results from the Curiosity Rover.
4.	List other places in the solar system where life may have evolved and the conditions that are associated with each of these places.

L40: Students will be able to:
1.	Describe the two methods used for searching for planets that are orbiting around other stars.
2.	Explain how the planets we see around other stars are different than those we see in our solar system.
3.	Discuss the Habitability Zone and how that is related to life in the Universe.
4.	Describe ways we can detect life on planets orbiting around other stars.
5.	Discuss the Drake equation and the factors that we think are critical for the development of communicating civilizations.

L41: Students will be able to:
1.	Discuss the current efforts being made in the Search for Intelligent Life in the Universe.
2.	Describe the efforts that have already been made in creating messages that could be understood by extra terrestrials, including the construction and content of these messages.
3.	Explain why the efforts in detecting life and detecting intelligent life in the universe in the next few decades may be successful.



